---
layout: post
title:  CMSC 818e Day 2
image:
  feature: pepper_crop.png
date:   2018-08-29 20:34
tags:   class_notes
---

These are notes taken during CMSC 818e: Distributed And Cloud-Based Storage Systems. Course webpage and syllabus [here](http://triffid.cs.umd.edu/818/).

# Day Two

## Discussion of Immutability Changes Everything

 - Pat Helland's ["Immutability Changes Everything"](http://cidrdb.org/cidr2015/Papers/CIDR15_Paper16.pdf).
 - fight ambiguity with append-only applications
 - use content-defined names (e.g. hash of the file)
 - Amol's DataHub - GitHub for datasets - how to store them efficiently? Each dataset is treated as immutable; might be new versions but the datasets themselves don't change.
 - Deal with massively parallel "big data" with MapReduce; depends on immutable data -- doesn't matter when the actual computation on a subslice happens, because it won't change.
 - Append-only computing: logs are the truth (log is immutable); single-master changes are applied sequentially via single-master or consensus.
 - Immutable is not always immutable:
    - optimizing for read access: indexes, de-normalization
    - farming out portions of work, with re-try
    - tension between fast access (tiny tables) and expense of joins
    - normalization is there to eliminate update anomalies.
 - Immutability enables unambiguous identity (content-defined names)
 - Immutability enables massive replication/caching/parallelism
 - Immutability eliminates locking
 - Immutability enables re-computation
    - from immutable data
    - of immutable data

## Project 1

 - Build a file system in Go. Will be completely in-memory. Implemented as in-memory tree specified by root.
 - [gitlab link](https://gitlab.cs.umd.edu/keleher/818fall18/tree/master/p1)
 - Use Fuse - an interface for building user-level file systems.
 - modify `dfs.go` per README; don't have to implement all of the functions at once. Start with 'hello' and slowly add in others
 - `bazil` can have a file system that doesn't crash with a very small subset of the methods defined.
 - use Piazza to communicate with class & Pete
