---
layout: post
title:  CMSC 818e Day 1
image:
  feature: pepper_crop.png
date:   2018-08-27 13:59
tags:   class_notes
---

These are notes taken during CMSC 818e: Distributed And Cloud-Based Storage Systems. Course webpage and syllabus [here](http://triffid.cs.umd.edu/818/).

# Day One

## Readings

There are readings for each class; do the readings before class and submit notes via blog by 6PM the night before the reading is due.

## Projects

 - Project 1: A Key-Value Store in Go - implement the second half of a remote procedure call (Due midnight Sunday Sept 9th)
 - Project 2: Serialization, Persistence, and Immutability
 - Project 3: Replication, and a Cloud Client
 - Project 4: Distributed Consensus
 - Project 5: Building High-Level Abstractions from a Shared Log

Access projects via CMS Gitlab; submit via Dr. Keleher's server.

Use Piazza to talk about projects; for Go troubleshooting.

# Distributed Systems

## Decentralized:
 - no single master (usually), point-of-failure
 - local control/autonomy
 - some have done unusual things like using entropy to decide

## (often)P2P
 - all are peers
 - peers are basically the same
 - file-sharing:
    - sometimes means data distribution, control central

# Distribution and Geo-replication:
 - distance (latency, no simultaneity, agreement difficult)
 - "a DS is one where networked computers coordinate activity only by passing messages"
    - Internet, intranets, mobile devices
 - small
    - low latency
    - high bandwidth
    - secure, reliable interconnect
    - dependent failure
    - coordinated resources
 - big
    - high latency
    - low bandwidth
    - autonomous
    - unreliable network
    - fear and distrust (byzantine failure)
    - independent failures
    - decentralized administration

## Challenges
 - private communication over private networks
    - who sent it (auth), integrity, privacy
 - building reliable systems from unreliable components
    - independent failures

> "A distributed system is one in which the failure of a machine I have never heard of can prevent me from doing my work.  - Leslie Lamport

 - location
    - placement for efficient sharing
    - finding it later
 - coordination and shared state
    - what should we do, and when?
    - can we agree on what we've done?
    - who is this "we" you speak of?

## Reliability
 - recoverability:
    - don't lose data if a failure occurs (also durability)
    - assume
        - nodes have storage
        - volatile: fast (memory)
        - non-volatile: slow (disks)
    - but NVRAM getting cheaper, flash memory, etc
 - availability
 - survivability
 - also
    - security, adaptability, agility, etc

## Consequences of distribution
 - concurrent processes
    - user work independently
    - non-determinism, race conditions, sync, deadlock, liveliness
 - no global clock
    - coordination through messages (CSP)
    - clock sync works, but only to a degree
 - no global state
    - no single process has knowledge of entire state of the system
 - failures
    - node failures
    - network partitions

## Why Go
 - interfaces - no inheritance, no objects in Go, just structs
 - slices > array
    - slices give you a pointer
    - copy by value => copy by reference
    - append
 - type safe
 - gothreads - lightweight
 - channels - the way that gothreads talk to each other. FIFO buffer, synchronize multiple writers and readers. can be single value, can be buffered
 - garbage collection - pervasive in Go. Can be a problem - will happen asynchronously with respect to your program, don't know when it will happen

## Preliminaries
 - GOPATH
 - go build/install/get/run ...
 - emacs? go-mode comes w/ distribution
 - visual studio?
 - atom w/ go pro?

## Gotchas
 - everything is passed by values: pointers, but also structs, arrays (use slices)

 ```
 var arr = [3]int{1,2,3}

 sl := arr[0:2] // first two items but not last
 fmt.Println(sl)

 sl2 := []int{4,5,6}
 fmt.Println(sl2)

 sl3 := append(sl2, 7, 8)
 fmt.Println(sl3)

 sl4 := append(sl, 7, 8)
 fmt.Println(sl4)
 ```

 - no pointer arithmetic
 - there is a ++ operator, but it's not an expression
 - no type aliases
    - ` type dint int` no distinct types
    - can add methods to user-defined types
 - duck typing - hard to look at a struct and see what type it is
 - no ternary
 - no constructors
 - no destructors
 - no default args
 - everything is a package

## The CAP Theorem
The [CAP theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CAP_theorem) states that it is impossible for a distributed data store to simultaneously provide more than two out of the following three guarantees:

 - *Consistency*: Every read receives the most recent write or an error
 - *Availability*: Every request receives a (non-error) response – without guarantee that it contains the most recent write
 - *Partition tolerance*: The system continues to operate despite an arbitrary number of messages being dropped (or delayed) by the network between nodes

## Exercise: Loops and Functions

Practice with control flow: Fill out the definition of the square root iteratively using the Tour of Go
implement a `for` loop:

```
// Modify the code below to compute a square root w/ the iterative approach
// outlined. You may use "math.Abs()", but not any other math method.
// Modify sqrt to return both a number of iterations, and the final value,
// modify main to print them out.
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"math"
)

func Sqrt(x float64) (float64, int) {
	var z, diff, iter = 1.0, 1.0, 0
	for i := 1; i < 20; i++ {
		diff = (z*z - x) / (2 * z)
		switch {
		case math.Abs(diff) < 0.01:
			break
		default:
			z -= diff
			iter++
		}

	}
	return z, iter

}

func main() {
	z, iter := Sqrt(50)
	fmt.Printf("After %v iterations, z = %v\n", iter, z)
}

```
